Schema.org 
/ Web of Things
22 Sept 2016, W3C TPAC, Lisbon
Dan Brickley <danbri@google.com>
 Schema.org CG chair / project webmaster

Schema.org and WoT/IoT
Quick overview of Schema.org
Origins, approach and status
Approach to standardization
(Early) thinking on schema collaboration for IoT/WoT
Discussion

Schema.org overview: origins, approach and status
	 
Q: What is it?
A: Large (and growing) collection of descriptive schemas, used primarily in the public Web, but also in email messages and other contexts.
Q: What kinds of descriptions?
A: Many! People, places, things, events, recipes, reviews, products, businesses, opening hours, creative works (books, articles etc.), many more. 
Q: Where is it used?
A: Initially and primarily by search engines, but also sites like Pinterest, or initiatives like http://api.science.ai/ (scholarly publishing)
Q: How big is it?
 A: Core vocabulary currently has 583 types, 846 properties, and 114 Enumeration values. More in extension sections.

Approach (continued…)
Q: What technical approach / syntax / standards does it build on?
A: Launched in 2011 using HTML5 Microdata, later embraced also RDFa and JSON-LD as alternate syntaxes. Underlying approach is ~ lightweight RDF. 
Q: How widely used is it?
A: Very. Used in a significant proportion of the Web. Generally publication and consumption are on a page-by-page basis (rather than sites as graphs).
Q: How broad is the scope?
A: From the start, as broad as Web search - any topics that are substantially represented in the public Web, search queries and applications. In ~2013 we expanded also to explore schemas in email, covering more personal data.

Schema.org: Approach to standardization
Founded as a collaboration between Google, Bing and Yahoo in 2011, and soon joined by Yandex. 
Moved quickly to using W3C Semantic Web Interest Group's public-vocabs@w3.org forum as its public community.
Builds on (and helps deploy) W3C standards, but not itself a W3C standard or WG.
In recent years, established an informal process that combines W3C Community Group discussion with final review of regular releases by a small steering group with reps from original founders and the wider community.
Changes, additions and improvements come from public discussions and occur primarily on the Github site.

Schema.org: Standards approach, continued
Initial approach differed from "classic RDF" (Linked Data, Semantic Web etc.) by having a much larger vocabulary. Instead of 40-50 terms per vocabulary, began at around 500 and has since doubled.
In 2015 introduced a soft modularization mechanism, 'hosted extensions' (bib.schema.org, auto.schema.org, health-lifesci.schema.org) as well as a distributed approach to independent extension, e.g. see http://gs1.org/voc/
Various tradeoffs. Stability and agility; usability, monolithic-icity; maintainability, modularity, etc.
Each release is also published as a named frozen snapshot, including definitions in RDF-based formats, to support W3C spec citation.

Schema.org and IoT / WoT
Aside: we tend to say "IoT" since "WoT" evokes "Web of Trust"; but we operate at a level of abstraction closer to W3C's WoT than to "technical plumbing".
Current draft release (for 3.2) includes an initial IoT "hosted extension", see http://iot.webschemas.org/
Initially a position paper to establish perspective, and a new mailing list (please join!) 
Rough approach (including some personal perspective):
IoT (and WoT) has a huge scope. 
In terms of descriptive schemas, the Web/Internet component may be less important than the real world Things angle. We have a lot of vocabulary for real world things.
The landscape has many many standard initiatives. We seek concrete usecases where we can make ourselves (and our schemas) useful, and plug into other efforts, including W3C WoT.
Position paper gives some brief scoping usecases. The existing use of schema.org within email may provide a model for thinking about security aspects (i.e. left to surrounding context).
Schema.org doesn't do protocols, except "Action" has "potentialAction". Not clear how deep to go!

Usecase areas from position paper
User data portability (e.g. my Withings scale records my weight, can factual data records / datasets be made available to users and apps in a standard way?).
Beacons and the description of the physical environment, including sensors and sensor-based datasets - e.g. PhysicalWeb, physical accessibility, opening hours, transport data etc. (building on existing Dataset type?)
Smart smart Assistants - e.g. personal data (flights), potential actions, …
On-device content. E.g. TV/video content, music, personal/family photos and media archives. Schema.org has good models for TV/Radio, MusicBrainz etc.
Energy efficiency, ...

Discussion
See https://www.w3.org/2016/09/22-wot-minutes.html for WoT WG minutes / notes from presentation.
